Apple (fruit)

An apple is the round, edible fruit of an apple tree (Malus spp.). Fruit trees of the orchard or domestic apple (Malus domestica), the most widely grown in the genus, are cultivated worldwide. The tree originated in Central Asia, where its wild ancestor, Malus sieversii, is still found. Apples have been grown for thousands of years in Eurasia before they were introduced to North America by European colonists. Apples have cultural significance in many mythologies, including Norse and Greek, and religions such as Christianity in Europe.

Apples grown from seeds tend to be very different from those of their parents, and the resultant fruit frequently lacks desired characteristics. For commercial purposes, including botanical evaluation, apple cultivars are propagated by clonal grafting onto rootstocks. Apple trees grown without rootstocks tend to be larger and much slower to fruit after planting. Rootstocks are used to control the speed of growth and the size of the resulting tree, allowing for easier harvesting.

There are more than 7,500 cultivars of apples. Different cultivars are bred for various tastes and uses, including cooking, eating raw, and cider or apple juice production. Trees and fruit are prone to fungal, bacterial, and pest problems, which can be controlled by a number of organic and non-organic means. In 2010, the fruit's genome was sequenced as part of research on disease control and selective breeding in apple production.

Etymology

The word apple is derived from Old English aeppel, meaning "fruit," not specifically the apple. That in turn is descended from the Proto-Germanic noun aplaz, descended in turn from Proto-Indo-European h2ebol. As late as the 17th century, the word also functioned as a generic term for all fruit including nuts; one example is the pineapple, the swollen accessory fruit outside of the cashew nut known as the "cashew apple," another is a 14th-century Middle English expression appel of paradis, meaning a banana.

Description

The apple tree is deciduous, generally standing from 2 to 4.5 metres tall in cultivation and up to 15 metres in the wild, though more typically 2 to 10 metres. When cultivated, the size, shape and branch density are determined by rootstock selection and trimming method. Apple trees may naturally have a rounded to erect crown with a dense canopy of leaves. The bark of the trunk is dark gray or gray-brown, but young branches are reddish or dark-brown with a smooth texture. Young twigs are covered in fine downy hairs; they become hairless when older.

Blossoms are produced in spring simultaneously with the budding of the leaves and are produced on spurs and some long shoots. When the flower buds first begin to open the petals are rose-pink and fade to white or light pink when fully open with each flower 3 to 4 centimeters in diameter. The five-petaled flowers are grouped in an inflorescence consisting of a cyme with 3 to 7 flowers. The central flower of the inflorescence is called the "king bloom"; it opens first and can develop a larger fruit. Open apple blossoms are damaged by even brief exposures to temperatures of -2 degrees Celsius or less, although the overwintering wood and buds are hardy down to -40 degrees Celsius.

The fruit is a pome that matures in late summer or autumn. The true fruits or carpels are the harder interior chambers inside the apple's core. There are usually five carpels inside an apple, but there may be as few as three. Each of the chambers contains one or two seeds. The edible flesh is formed from the receptacle at the base of the flower.

The size of the fruit varies widely between cultivars, but generally has a diameter between 2.5 and 12 centimeters. The shape is quite variable and may be nearly round, elongated, conical, or short and wide. The groundcolor of ripe apples is yellow, green, yellow-green or whitish yellow. The overcolor of ripe apples can be orange-red, pink-red, red, purple-red or brown-red. The skin may be wholly or partly russeted, making it rough and brown. The flesh is generally pale yellowish-white, though it can be pink, yellow or green.

Genome and taxonomy

Apples are diploid, with two sets of chromosomes per cell, though triploid cultivars with three sets are not uncommon. Apples have 17 chromosomes and an estimated genome size of approximately 650 megabases. Several whole genome sequences have been completed and made available. The first one in 2010 was based on the diploid cultivar Golden Delicious. The first whole genome assembly was estimated to contain around 57,000 genes, though more recent genome sequences support estimates between 42,000 and 44,700 protein-coding genes.

The availability of whole genome sequences has provided evidence that the wild ancestor of the cultivated apple most likely is Malus sieversii. Central Asia is generally considered the center of origin for apples due to the genetic variability in specimens there. The wild ancestor of Malus domestica was found growing wild in the mountains of Central Asia in southern Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, and northwestern China.

History

The apple is thought to have been domesticated 4,000 to 10,000 years ago in the Tian Shan mountains, and then to have traveled along the Silk Road to Europe, with hybridisation and introgression of wild crabapples from Siberia, the Caucasus, and Europe. Chinese soft apples have been cultivated as dessert apples for more than 2,000 years in China.

Among the traits selected for by human growers are size, fruit acidity, color, firmness, and soluble sugar. At the Sammardenchia-Cueis site near Udine in Northeastern Italy, seeds from some form of apples have been found in material carbon dated to between 6570 and 5684 BCE. There is indirect evidence of apple cultivation in the third millennium BCE in the Middle East. There is direct evidence, apple cores, dated to the 10th century BCE from a Judean site between the Sinai and Negev. There was substantial apple production in European classical antiquity, and grafting was certainly known then.

Apples were introduced to North America by colonists in the 17th century, and the first named apple cultivar was introduced in Boston by Reverend William Blaxton in 1640. The only apples native to North America are crab apples. Apple cultivars brought as seed from Europe were spread along Native American trade routes, as well as being cultivated on colonial farms. An 1845 United States apples nursery catalogue sold 350 of the "best" cultivars, showing the proliferation of new North American cultivars by the early 19th century. In the 20th century, irrigation projects in Eastern Washington began and allowed the development of the multibillion-dollar fruit industry, of which the apple is the leading product.

Until the 20th century, farmers stored apples in frostproof cellars during the winter for their own use or for sale. Improved transportation of fresh apples by train and road replaced the necessity for storage. Controlled atmosphere facilities are used to keep apples fresh year-round, using high humidity, low oxygen, and controlled carbon dioxide levels to maintain fruit freshness. They were first researched at Cambridge University in the 1920s and first used in the United States in the 1950s.

Cultivation and propagation

Many apples grow readily from seeds. However, apples must be propagated asexually to obtain cuttings with the characteristics of the parent. This is because seedling apples do not "breed true"; instead they are "extreme heterozygotes," meaning seedlings are all different from each other and from their parents.

Because apples are not true breeders when planted as seeds, propagation usually involves grafting of cuttings. The rootstock used for the bottom of the graft can be selected to produce trees of a large variety of sizes, as well as changing the winter hardiness, insect and disease resistance, and soil preference of the resulting tree. Dwarf rootstocks can be used to produce very small trees, which bear fruit many years earlier in their life cycle than full size trees, and are easier to harvest.

Dwarf rootstocks for apple trees can be traced as far back as 300 BCE, to the area of Persia and Asia Minor. Dwarf rootstocks became common by the 15th century and later went through several cycles of popularity and decline throughout the world. The majority of the rootstocks used to control size in apples were developed in England in the early 1900s.

Most new apple cultivars originate as seedlings, which either arise by chance or are bred by deliberately crossing cultivars with promising characteristics. Apples can also form bud sports, which are mutations on a single branch. Some bud sports turn out to be improved strains of the parent cultivar.

Apples have been acclimatized in Ecuador at very high altitudes, where they can often provide crops twice per year because of constant temperate conditions year-round.

Pollination

Apples are self-incompatible; they must cross-pollinate to develop fruit. During the flowering each season, apple growers often utilize pollinators to carry pollen. Honey bees are most commonly used. Orchard mason bees are also used as supplemental pollinators in commercial orchards.

Cultivars are sometimes classified by the day of peak bloom in the average 30-day blossom period, with pollinizers selected from cultivars within a 6-day overlap period. There are four to seven pollination groups in apples, depending on climate. One cultivar can be pollinated by a compatible cultivar from the same group or a close group.

Yield and harvesting

Cultivars vary in their yield and the ultimate size of the tree, even when grown on the same rootstock. Some cultivars, if left unpruned, grow very large, letting them bear more fruit, but making harvesting more difficult. Depending on tree density, mature trees typically bear 40 to 200 kilograms of apples each year, though productivity can be close to zero in poor years. Apples are harvested using three-point ladders that are designed to fit amongst the branches. Trees grafted on dwarfing rootstocks bear about 10 to 80 kilograms of fruit per year.

Some farms with apple orchards open them to the public so consumers can pick their own apples. Crops ripen at different times of the year according to the cultivar. Cultivars that yield their crop in the summer include "Sweet Bough" and "Duchess"; fall producers include "Blenheim"; winter producers include "King," "Swayzie," and "Tolman Sweet."

Storage

Commercially, apples can be stored for months in controlled atmosphere chambers. Apples are commonly stored in chambers with lowered concentrations of oxygen to reduce respiration and slow softening and other changes if the fruit is already fully ripe. The gas ethylene is used by plants as a hormone which promotes ripening, decreasing the time an apple can be stored. For storage longer than about six months the apples are picked earlier, before full ripeness, when ethylene production by the fruit is low.

For home storage, most cultivars of apple can be stored for three weeks in a pantry and four to six weeks from the date of purchase in a refrigerator. Some varieties of apples, such as "Granny Smith" and "Fuji," have more than three times the storage life of others.

Pests and diseases

A wide range of pests and diseases can affect the plant. Mildew is characterized by light grey powdery patches appearing on the leaves, shoots and flowers, normally in spring. Aphids are small insects with sucking mouthparts; five species commonly attack apples, including the apple grain aphid, rosy apple aphid, apple aphid, spirea aphid, and woolly apple aphid.

Apple scab causes leaves to develop olive-brown spots with a velvety texture that later turn brown and become cork-like in texture. The disease also affects the fruit. Apple scab is spread through fungus growing in old apple leaves on the ground and spreads during warm spring weather to infect the new year's growth.

Among the most serious disease problems is a bacterial disease called fireblight, and three fungal diseases: Gymnosporangium rust, black spot, and bitter rot. Codling moths and the apple maggots of fruit flies cause serious damage to apple fruits, making them unsaleable. Young apple trees are also prone to mammal pests like mice and deer, which feed on the soft bark of the trees, especially in winter.

Cultivars

There are more than 7,500 known cultivars of apples. Cultivars vary in their yield and the ultimate size of the tree, even when grown on the same rootstock. Different cultivars are available for temperate and subtropical climates. The UK's National Fruit Collection in Kent includes over 2,000 apple cultivars.

Most cultivars are bred for eating fresh, known as dessert apples, though some are cultivated specifically for cooking or producing cider. Cider apples are typically too tart and astringent to eat fresh, but they give the beverage a rich flavor that dessert apples cannot.

In Europe, apple breeding programs are conducted at places such as the Julius Kuehn Institut, the German federal research center for cultivated plants. In the United States there are many apple breeding programs associated with universities. Cornell University has had a program operating since 1880 in Geneva, New York, while Washington State University started a program to support their home state's apple industry in 1994.

Released by the University of Minnesota in 1991, the Honeycrisp has become famous for its crispness and juiciness, thereby commanding high market prices. By the 2020s, about half of the new apple varieties entering the market in the United States and Canada are Honeycrisp progeny. Such hybrids include the SweeTango, a cross between the Honeycrisp and the Zestar, introduced by the University of Minnesota in 2008, and the Cosmic Crisp, a cross of the Honeycrisp and the Enterprise, released by Washington State University in 2017.

Commercially popular apple cultivars are soft but crisp. Other desirable qualities in modern commercial apple breeding are a colorful skin, absence of russeting, ease of shipping, lengthy storage ability, high yields, disease resistance, common apple shape, and developed flavor. Modern apples are generally sweeter than older cultivars, as popular tastes in apples have varied over time. Most North Americans and Europeans favor crunchy, sweet, and subacid apples. In the United States today, the most popular apple varieties are the Ambrosia, Honeycrisp, and Jazz, while in Canada, the Honeycrisp, Ambrosia, and Gala take the top spots.

Production

World production of apples in 2023 was 97 million tonnes, with China producing 51 percent of the total. Secondary producers were the United States, Turkey, and Poland. By country, production figures in millions of tonnes were: China 49.6, United States 5.2, Turkey 4.6, Poland 3.9, India 2.9, and Iran 2.2, against a world total of 97.3 million tonnes.

Health and safety

Apple seeds contain small amounts of amygdalin, a sugar and cyanide compound known as a cyanogenic glycoside. Ingesting small amounts of apple seeds causes no ill effects, but consumption of extremely large doses can cause adverse reactions.

One form of apple allergy, often found in northern Europe, is called birch-apple syndrome and is found in people who are also allergic to birch pollen. Allergic reactions are triggered by a protein in apples that is similar to birch pollen. Reactions generally involve itching and inflammation of the mouth and throat, but in rare cases can also include life-threatening anaphylaxis. This reaction only occurs when raw fruit is consumed, as the allergen is neutralized in the cooking process.

A raw apple is 86 percent water and 14 percent carbohydrates, with negligible content of fat and protein. A reference serving of a raw apple with skin weighing 100 grams provides 52 calories and a moderate content of dietary fiber.

Culinary uses

Apple varieties can be grouped as cooking apples, eating apples, and cider apples, the last so astringent as to be almost inedible. Apples are consumed as juice, raw in salads, baked in pies, cooked into sauces and apple butter, or baked. They are sometimes used as an ingredient in savory foods, such as sausage and stuffing.

Several techniques are used to preserve apples and apple products. Traditional methods include drying and making apple butter. Juice and cider are produced commercially; cider is a significant industry in regions such as the West of England and Normandy.

A toffee apple or caramel apple is a confection made by coating an apple in hot toffee or caramel candy respectively and allowing it to cool. Apples and honey are a ritual food pairing eaten during the Jewish New Year of Rosh Hashanah.

Apples are an important ingredient in many desserts, such as pies, crumbles, and cakes. When cooked, some apple cultivars easily form a puree known as apple sauce, which can be cooked down to form a preserve, apple butter.

Apples are milled or pressed to produce apple juice, which may be drunk unfiltered, called apple cider in North America, or filtered. Apple juice can be fermented to make cider, called hard cider in North America, ciderkin, and vinegar. Through distillation, various alcoholic beverages can be produced, such as applejack, Calvados, and apple brandy. Organic apples are commonly produced in the United States, though due to infestations by key insects and diseases, organic production is difficult in Europe.

Mythology and culture

In Norse mythology, the goddess Idunn is portrayed in the Prose Edda as providing apples to the gods that give them eternal youthfulness. Apples appear in many religious traditions, including Greek and Roman mythology where it has an ambiguous symbolism of discord, fertility, or courtship.

In Greek mythology, the Greek hero Heracles, as a part of his Twelve Labours, was required to travel to the Garden of the Hesperides and pick the golden apples off the Tree of Life growing at its center. The Greek goddess of discord, Eris, became disgruntled after she was excluded from the wedding of Peleus and Thetis. In retaliation, she tossed a golden apple inscribed "for the most beautiful one" into the wedding party, which Paris of Troy ultimately awarded to Aphrodite, thus indirectly causing the Trojan War.

The apple was thus considered, in ancient Greece, sacred to Aphrodite. To throw an apple at someone was to symbolically declare one's love, and similarly, to catch it was to symbolically show one's acceptance of that love.